https://sci-hub.st/https://doi.org/10.1039/C9EE02709B

Historically, researchers have assumed CCS/U removes 85-90% of CO2 exhaust with an energy penalty of ~25%. However, until recently, no public data from a commercial power plant with CCU were available to test these numbers, nor was public data about DAC available. 

When upstream emissions are excluded, equipping a coal-fired plant with a carbon capture assembly powered by a natural gas-fired turbine resulted in the capturing of only 55.4% of coal combustion CO2, and only 33.9% of coal plus gas combustion CO2. When including upstream CO2 related to the production of natural gas, the CC equipment reduces emissions by only 11% over twenty years. When wind, instead of gas, is used to power the CC equipment, emissions decrease by 37.4% over twenty years. However, using the wind electricity that powers the CC equipment instead to replace coal electricity directly at the same plant - only the electricity that powers the CC equipment! - reduces CO2-eq emissions by 49.7%. Overall, taking into account the high capital cost of new carbon capture equipment, the carbon avoidance cost is 39 times higher for carbon capture compared to wind energy generation.

It should be noted that emissions are only part of the story. Because CCU equipment does not capture health-affecting air pollutants, air pollution emissions continue from coal and rise by about 25% compared with no capture from the use of natural gas to run the CC equipment. The social cost of pollution and climate change are also higher for fossil energy and carbon capture compared to renewables.

It does not make sense to power either industrial carbon capture or direct air capture with natural gas. There is no case where wind powering a DAC plant has a social cost below that of wind replacing any fossil fuel or bioenergy power plant directly. This is because the DAC plant always incurs an equipment cost that win alone never incurs, while also allowing air pollution and mining to continue. Therefore, even before considering the disposition of the captured CO2, there is no carbon benefit of carbon capture. 

When the fate of captured CO2 is considered, the problem may deepen. If CO2 is sealed underground without leaks, little added emissions occur. If the CO2 is used to enhance oil recovery, its current major application, more oil is extracted is burned. If the CO2 is used to create carbon-based e-fuels to replace gasoline and diesel, energy is still required to produce the fuel, and the fuel is still burned in vehicles (creating pollution).

In sum, all types of carbon capture are opportunity costs, not close to zero-carbon technologies. For the same energy cost, wind turbines and solar panels reduce much more CO2 while also reducing fossil air pollution and mining, pipelines, refineries, gas stations, tanker trucks, and so on.