https://doi.org/10.3390/su10124453

The penetration of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) into everyday life pushed the narrow boundaries of conventional sharing activities and created scalable sharing economies. People are becoming increasingly interested in the shared use of goods instead of buying and owning them. Cost savings, social benefits, and the potential convenience motivate consumers to participate in sharing. These benefits have been enabled by digital technology that acts as a mediator to reduce the transaction costs and to increase seamless connectivity between providers who offer services and/or goods for sharing and those who intend to receive them.

The new practices of the digital sharing economy, along with the rules and regulations that influence them, have implications for the prevailing patterns of consumption at a large scale. The affordable, accessible marketplace of sharing shifts consumption from an ownership habit to more access-based practices. This development has a considerable potential for saving natural resources (and the emissions and waste connected to their use) due to increased utilization of existing assets and the stimulation of resource-efficient alternatives (e.g., bike-sharing in cities can make the use of bikes more popular) on one side. On the other side, the efficiency gains can also increase the level of demand.

A digital sharing economy is a resource allocation system, based on sharing practices, that is enabled by information and communication technology (ICT) and coordinated through participation of individuals and possibly commercial organizations (businesses) with the aim to provide temporary access to resources that involves either direct or indirect monetary value. 

##### Level 1: direct impacts
Concerning the digital sharing economy, we can assume that the total life-cycle impact of the digital sharing platform is usually very small compared to the (positive or negative) impact of the resources being shared. For example, the smartphones and servers used to organize car sharing have a relatively small life-cycle impact compared to the life-cycle impact of a single car, which on average emits per 200–300 km driven as much CO2 as a smartphone during its whole life cycle. Furthermore, we only have to allocate a relatively small part of the smartphone’s life cycle impact to the purpose of participation in sharing platforms because the use of smartphone, as a multi-purpose device, is itself shared among many purposes and applications.

##### Level 2: enabling impacts
The enabling impacts of ICT can be categorized according to the effects of technological changes (process optimization, media substitution, externalization of control, and others) which are enabled by ICT application and which can bring processes of production and consumption closer to a theoretical optimum in terms of resource efficiency. An optimization effect in consumption processes in the sharing economy reduces the need for new products and thus resources. The contributing role of digital sharing to a more sustainable consumption process is compelling to some extent as sharing slows down the flow of tangible resources by enabling an extended mode of utilizing them, just by sharing an intangible resource, that is, information.

Platforms that present three-dimensional (3D) printed goods are also categorized in the “sustainable production” platforms. They provide access to printers for individuals and small businesses within a local community. 3D printing technology lowers manufacturing inputs and outputs through low-volume, customized, and high-value production processes at a low cost. It reduces the manufacturing-related resource use and energy demand by only consuming the quantity of materials that will end up in final products without producing too much process-related waste. In addition to optimizing manufacturing of products, 3D printing contributes to saving energy and reduction in CO2 emissions over the entire life cycle of its products and per unit of gross domestic product (GDP), and can be a potentially effective catalyst for environmental sustainability and sustainable development.

##### Level 3: structural impacts
Although the sharing economy involves a substitution effect that occurs in replacing tangible assets with increasing level of immaterial resource (information), the question whether, to what extent and under what conditions it will drive dematerialization has to be considered open. Obviously, there is still high dependency on material and physical assets in sharing systems. Sharing is inherently expected to balance the need for ‘new’ products. In fact, the case with the sharing economy is a shift of consumption from the ownership of new products towards the access to available, underused resources that may not necessarily represent dematerialization and may not eventually lead to a decoupling effect.