https://www.econjournals.com/index.php/ijeep/article/view/965/565

Energy efficiency improvements are considered key to tackling climate change based on the idea that they lead to lower energy consumption, and consequently, to a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions. These gains in efficiency, induced in part by technological progress, have also contributed to promote economic growth while reducing resource consumption and emissions of pollutants. However, a rebound effect takes place, which is an increase in energy consumption following an energy efficiency improvement. In extreme cases, energy efficient improvements may even lead to overall energy consumption increases, a phenomenon known as the Jevons paradox.

Energy policies are ineffective in terms of results achieved if the rebound effect is not taken into account. Furthermore, they can involve high opportunity cost if public resources used in efficiency measures cause unwanted effects. Therefore, energy efficiency measures that cause higher direct rebound effects should be controlled for additional variables such as energy prices. Although the rebound effect might not result in backfire, potential savings resulting from the improvement still need to be maximally exploited through environmental taxation or other measures.

The rebound effect can be either direct or indirect. An example of direct rebound effect is the implementation of thermal insulation resulting in higher internal temperatures rather than reduced energy consumption. An example of indirect rebound effect is the re-spending effect of monetary savings achieved from energy efficiency improvements. 

It is also necessary to consider that the rebound effect should not necessarily be an adverse effect. If the goal of improving energy efficiency is strictly economic, that is, to promote economic growth without considering energy consumption, the rebound effect would become a desirable result. This is not the situation when the policy target of efficiency is to reduce energy consumption and pollution and to mitigate climate change. Notwithstanding, the policies to control the rebound effect counteract economic growth.

The rebound effect is the result of the economic responses when there is a reduction of the cost of provision of certain energy services, due to an improvement of energy productivity of providing energy services. Thus, many of the policies to control the rebound effect should aim at modifying the behavioral responses of economic agents if an efficiency improvement takes place.

Given the characteristics of the rebound effect, economic instruments and specifically environmental taxation can play a key role in modifying behaviors and, therefore, preventing it or minimizing its effects. The main objective of the taxation instruments would be to increase the costs of providing the useful work of the various energy services, while improving efficiency. Similarly, the rebound effect could also be minimized through energy prices policies. In effecting these steps, there is no reduction in the cost of the energy service perceived by consumers (or its reduction is minimized) and then they do not react by increasing its consumption(or increased consumption is also minimized).Nevertheless, to ensure that energy efficiency improvements are adopted, taxation would be on adopters and on non-adopters, creating thereby an incentive to energy efficiency. At this point it is important to mention that a tax or a prices measure that tried to compensate the rebound effect could have perverse effects on incentives in technical innovation in the sense that firms will not benefit from them, removing manufacturers’ incentive to improve efficiency.

A taxation that fully counteracted the direct rebound effect would be one that compensated for the reduction of cost due to the improvement of the energy efficiency. That is, a taxation that would keep constant the generalized cost of providing useful work. After an increase of the efficiency, the tax would increase according to the proportion represented by the new energy efficiency compared to the previous one. The developed taxation would fully offset the direct rebound effect, leading to a maximum effectiveness of the energy efficiency improvements. This would mean a reduction in energy consumption and, therefore, a reduction in resource consumption and in emissions of greenhouse gases.

However, one key aspect would be the way in which revenues obtained from the tax are spent, since this would have several macroeconomic effects. It could cause distortions in the economy, an income transfer from households to the public sector and an additional re-spending effect produced by the destination of the public expenditure. Notwithstanding, a correctly defined tax could minimize it. A possibility would be to conceive it as earmarked, and revenues should be used to subsidize those households with the best environmental practices, in terms of sustainable consumption or those industries (or companies)in sectors with low drag coefficients in terms of energy consumption. Earmarked green taxes tend to benefit from broader public acceptance, and this increases their political viability.